- Feature Name: A plan for deprecating APIs within Rust
- Start Date: 2015-06-03
- RFC PR: 
- Rust Issue: 

# Summary

There has been an ongoing [discussion on 
internals](https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/thoughts-on-aggressive-deprecation-in-libstd/2176/55) 
about how we are going to evolve the standard library. This RFC tries 
to condense the consensus.

As a starting point, the current deprecation feature allows a developer
to annotate their API items with `#[deprecated(since="1.1.0")]` and
have suitable warnings shown if the feature is used.

# Motivation

We want to:

1. evolve the `std` API, including making items unavailable with new 
versions
2. with minimal -- next to no -- breakage
3. be able to plug security/safety holes
4. avoid confusing users
5. stay backwards-compatible so people can continue to use dependencies 
written for older versions (except where point 3. forbids this)
6. give users sensible defaults
7. and an update plan when they want to use a more current version

This was quite short, so let me explain a bit: We want Rust to be
successful, and since the 1.0.0 release, there is an expectation of
stability. Therefore the first order of business when evolving the
`std` API is: **Don't break people's code**. 

In practice there will be some qualification, e.g. if an API is 
*inherently* unsafe, it should be acceptable make it completely 
unavailable, as any code using it was in fact broken to begin with. 
Therefore it is acceptable to make this code stop working altogether, 
as long as the resulting error is not too confusing (which again means 
we should make the item inaccessible instead of removing it).

If an API permits unsafe uses, and a safer alternative is available, we 
may want to mark it as insecure in addition to deprecating it, so that 
people will get warnings even if they specified an older target 
version. We want to have a different kind of warning than the 
standard deprecation warning, as there are already some crates (e.g. 
compiletest.rs) on crates.io that declare `#![deny(deprecate)]`, so 
those warnings would turn to errors.

We also really want to make features inaccessible in a newer version, 
not just mark them as deprecated. Otherwise we would bloat our APIs 
with deprecated features that no one uses (see Java). To do this, it's 
not enough to hide the feature from the docs, as that would be 
confusing (see point 4.) to those who encounter a hidden API.

Not breaking code also mean we do not want to have the deprecation 
feature interfere with a project's dependencies, which would teach 
people to disable or ignore the warnings until their builds break. On
the other hand, we don't want to have all unavailable APIs show up
for library writers, as that -- apart from defeating the purpose of the
deprecation feature -- would create a confusing mirror world, 
which is directly in conflict to point 4.

We also want the feature to be *usable* to the programmer, therefore
any additional code we require should be minimal. If the feature is too
obscure, or too complicated to use, people will just 
`#![allow(deprecate)]` and complain when their build finally breaks.

Note that we expect many more *users* than *writers* of the `std` APIs,
so the wants of the former should count higher than those of the latter.

Ideally, this can be done so that all parts play well together: Cargo 
could help with setup (and possibly reporting), rustc warnings / error 
reporting should be extended to inform people of pending or active 
deprecations, rustdoc needs some way of reflecting the API lifecycle.

# Detailed design

We already declare deprecation in terms of Rust versions (like "1.0", 
"1.2"). The current attribute looks like `#[deprecated(since = "1.0.0", 
reason="foo")]`. This should be extended to add an optional 
`removed_at` key, to state that the item should be made inaccessible at 
that version. Note that while this allows for marking items as 
deprecated, there is purposely no provision to actually *remove* items. 
In fact this proposal strongly advises not to remove an API type, 
unless security concerns are deemed more important than the resulting 
breakage from removing it or the API item has some fault that means it 
cannot be used correctly at all (thus leaving the API in place would 
result in the same level of breakage than removing it).

Currently every rustc version implements only its own version, having 
multiple versions is possible using something like multirust, though 
this does not work within a build. Also currently rustc versions do not 
guarantee interoperability. This RFC aims to change this situation.

First, crates should state their target version using a 
`#![target(std= "1.2.0"]` attribute on the main module. The version
string format is the one that cargo currently uses.

Cargo should insert the current rust version by default on `cargo new` 
and *warn* if no version is defined on all other commands. It may 
optionally *note* if the specified target version is outdated on `cargo 
package` or even  `cargo build --release`. To get the current rust 
version, cargo could query rustc -V (with some postprocessing) or use a 
symbol exported by the rust libraries (e.g. `rustc::target_version`).

Cargo should also be able to 'hold back' a new library version if its 
declared target version is newer than the rust version installed on the 
system. In those cases, cargo should emit a warning urging the user to 
upgrade their rust installation.

In the case of packages on crates.io, we could offer a mapping of 
target versions to crate versions for each crate, so the corresponding 
crate version can directly be used without further search.

In the case of crates from git, the only reliable way to implement it 
is to search the history for a suitable target version definition. Note 
that we'd expect the target version to go up monotonously, so a binary 
search should be possible, also we can filter out all commits that do 
not touch lib.rs/mod.rs. 

This is a very complex feature to implement, so stopping with an error 
and referring to the user to do the search is an acceptable option.

[crates.io](https://crates.io) may start denying new packages that do 
not declare a version to give the target version requirement more 
weight to library authors. 

`rustc` should use this target version definition to check for 
deprecated items. If the target version is specified, use of API items 
whose `since` attribute is less or equal to the target version of the 
crate should trigger a warning, while API items whose `removed_at` 
attribute is less or equal to the target version should trigger an 
error.

We can also define a `future deprecation` lint set to `Allow` by 
default to allow people being proactive about items that are going to
be deprecated. 

Also if the target definition has a higher version than `rustc`, it 
should briefly warn that it probably has to be updated in order to 
build the crate. However, `rustc` should try to build the code anyway; 
further errors may give the user additional information.

If *no* target version is defined, deprecation checking is deactivated 
(as we cannot assume a specific rust version), however a note 
stating the same should be printed (as with cargo â€“ we should probably 
make cargo not warn on build to get rid of duplicate warnings). Since
all current code comes without a target version, we have to assume
a minimal version 1.0.0.

In addition to the note, the `std` authors could opt to create a new 
`#[since="1.2.0"]` attribute, which would allow rustc to infer the 
minimal target version of some code from the API features it uses in 
absence of a specified version. Deprecation warnings/errors should then 
refer to the inferred target versions as well as the APIs that led to 
the inference of the latest version (at least perhaps on calling 
`rustc` with `-v`).

`rustdoc` should mark deprecated APIs as such (e.g. make them in a 
lighter gray font) and relegate removed APIs to a section below all 
others (and that may be hidden via a checkbox). We should not 
completely remove the documentation, as users of libraries that target 
old versions may still have a use for them, but neither should we let 
them clutter the docs. 

## Dealing with insecure items

Since just removing insecure items, though tempting, would lead to user 
confusion, a new `#[insecure(reason = "...")]` attribute should be 
added to all insecure API items. An `insecure_api` lint that by default 
raises `Error` can catch all uses of those items. To distinguish 
between items *some uses of which* may be insecure and *inherently* 
insecure items, either a second entry `inherent = true` could be added 
or a `#[maybe_insecure(reason = "...")]` annotation could take the 
latter part.

The rationale for defining a separate attribute is that it avoids 
mixing separate concerns (versioning and security), and that we want to
allow warnings/errors on dependencies regardless of specified target
versions. It also allows us to show the reason (from the attr) in the
lint message, which will be specific to the insecurity at hand and 
hopefully be helpful to the user.

## Policy

Even if this proposal reduces breakage arising from new versions
considerably, we should still exercise some care on evolving the APIs.
We already have a `beta` and `nightly` release train representing
future versions, this should be taken into account.

In general, the Tarzan principle should be followed where applicable
(First grab a vine, *then* let go of the previous vine). In terms of
API evolution, this means not deprecating a feature before a 
replacement has been stabilized. It is still possible to deprecate a
feature in a future version, to inform users of its impending 
departure.

# Drawbacks

By requiring full backwards-compatibility, we will never be able to 
actually remove stuff from the APIs, which will probably lead to some 
bloat. Other successful languages have lived with this for multiple 
decades, so it appears the tradeoff has seen some confirmation already. 

# Alternatives

* Have a flag in `Cargo.toml` instead of the crate root. This however 
requires an argument to `rustc`, because Cargo (in addition to those 
not using it) somehow has to pass it to `rustc`. Requiring such an 
argument on every non-cargoized build would increase room for error and 
thus pessimize usability. Also apart from availability of dependencies, 
which arguably is Cargo's main raison d'Ãªtre, we currently do not have 
a precedent where Cargo.toml has direct effect on the working of a 
crate's code.
* Opt-in and / or opt-out "feature-flags" (e.g. `#[legacy(..)]`) was 
suggested. The big problem is that this relies on the user being able 
to change their dependencies, which may not be possible for legal, 
organizational or other reasons. In contrast, a defined target version 
doesn't ever need to change. 
Depending on the specific case, it may be useful to allow a combination 
of `#![legacy(..)]`, `#![future(..)]` and `#![target(..)]` where each 
API version can declare the currently active feature and permit or
forbid use of the opt-in/out flags.
* Follow a more agressive strategy that actually removes stuff from the 
API. This would make it easier for the libstd creators at some cost for 
library and application writers, as they are required to keep up to 
date or face breakage * Hide deprecated items in the docs: This could 
be done either by putting them into a linked extra page or by adding a 
"show deprecated" checkbox that may be default be checked or not, 
depending on who you ask. This will however confuse people, who see the 
deprecated APIs in some code, but cannot find them in the docs anymore 
* Allow to distinguish "soft" and "hard" deprecation, so that an API 
can be marked as "soft" deprecated to dissuade new uses before hard 
deprecation is decided. Allowing people to specify deprecation in 
future version appears to have much of the same benefits without 
needing a new attribute key. * Decide deprecation on a per-case basis. 
This is what we do now. The proposal just adds a well-defined process 
to it * Never deprecate anything. Evolve the API by adding stuff only. 
Rust would be crushed by the weight of its own cruft before 2.0 even 
has a chance to land. Users will be uncertain which APIs to use * We 
could extend the deprecation feature to cover libraries. As Cargo.toml 
already defines the target versions of dependencies (unless declared as 
`"*"`), we could use much of the same machinery to allow library 
authors to join the process

# Unresolved questions

Should we allow library writers to use the same features for 
deprecating their API items? I think we should at least make sure that
our design and implementation allow this in the future.
